---
title: Acerca de los Cuáqueros
path: '/cuaqueros'
---

## ¿Quienes Eran Los Primeros Cuáqueros?

El nacimiento de la Sociedad Religiosa de los Amigos (llamados Cuáqueros), es usualmente
atribuido a la predicación y ministerio de George Fox en Inglaterra (1624–1691).
Verdaderamente, Fox se convirtió en un instrumento poderoso en la mano del Señor para
volver los corazones y abrir los ojos ciegos a la verdadera naturaleza, luz y vida del
cristianismo. Pero el increíble despertar espiritual y recuperación del verdadero
cristianismo que tuvo lugar en el siglo XVII, no puede ser atribuido a la obra y enseñanza
de ningún hombre. A decir verdad, había muchos miles de creyentes en este momento de la
historia (procedentes de todas las creencias y antecedentes), que se habían decepcionado
de las muchas sectas del cristianismo centradas en el hombre y carentes de vida, y estaban
clamando por la verdadera luz, vida y justicia de Jesucristo. Muchos vagaban de un lugar a
otro prestando oídos a pastores, sacerdotes y eruditos, y con todo, seguían gimiendo bajo
la carga de la contaminación interna y oscuridad espiritual, anhelando el agua viva que
fue prometida a Sus verdaderos discípulos. Al hallar lugar en estos corazones para Su
Palabra implantada, el Señor mismo levantó, reunió y purificó un pueblo para que Lo
adorara en Espíritu y Verdad, que testificara contra toda injusticia y religión sin vida,
y que llamara al mundo de regreso al cristianismo de los primeros apóstoles, al pacto
eterno de vida y luz en el Señor Jesucristo.

No sólo George Fox, sino cientos de otros ministros, fueron levantados por el Señor y
enviados por todo Europa, las colonias americanas y otros lugares, a predicar el verdadero
evangelio en la demostración del Espíritu y poder. ¿Qué predicaban ellos? Predicaban el
verdadero arrepentimiento de la naturaleza oscura y corrupta del hombre, y de todas las
obras muertas de la carne, “volviendo a los hombres de las tinieblas a la luz, y del
dominio de Satanás a Dios.” Predicaban a Cristo como la “Luz de la vida,” la “verdadera
Luz que alumbra a todos los hombres,” aparte de la cual nadie puede verdaderamente ver,
entender o experimentar las cosas del reino de Dios. En verdad, esta luz espiritual que
“resplandece en el corazón para iluminación del conocimiento de la gloria de Dios en la
faz de Jesucristo,” es la única manera de que el verdadero evangelio pueda ser distinguido
de las opiniones, ideas y tradiciones muertas de los hombres. Ellos predicaban la
verdadera libertad del pecado y de las tinieblas, y la experiencia de la victoria sobre la
ley del pecado y de la muerte que reina en el hombre natural y carnal. Ellos no se sentían
contentos quedando cortos de las muchas promesas de Dios sobre “limpiar el interior de la
copa y el plato,” y de “purificar la consciencia de obras muertas para servir al Dios
vivo.” Más bien, aprendieron y tomaron la cruz de Cristo, la cual es el poder de Dios para
crucificar y someter al hombre de carne, y al poder del pecado y muerte que reina en él.
Fielmente se aferraron a la cruz como un salvavidas celestial, sabiendo que el Segundo
Hombre no podría reinar en poder y paz donde el primer hombre permaneciera sin crucificar.
Ellos predicaban a Cristo como la sustancia viva y el cumplimiento de todas las sombras y
testimonios del antiguo pacto. Y en la medida que Cristo era revelado y formado en sus
corazones, experimentaban la adoración en Espíritu y verdad en el nuevo templo interno de
Dios, y el ministerio para el cuerpo del Señor que era resultado de Su vida en el
interior.

Los primeros cuáqueros no se vieron a sí mismos como una nueva secta o denominación
cristiana, sino como el regreso al cristianismo primitivo de los apóstoles, después de una
larga y oscura noche de la “apostasía” del verdadero Espíritu y gloria del nuevo pacto. De
hecho, por un tiempo, no tuvieron un nombre formal para sí mismos y simplemente se
llamaban entre sí “Amigos,” por las palabras de Jesús en el evangelio de Juan, “Vosotros
sois mis amigos, si hacéis lo que yo os mando. Ya no os llamaré siervos, porque el siervo
no sabe lo que hace su señor.” Según el diario de George Fox, el nombre “cuáqueros” se
originó con un magistrado llamado Gervase Bennet. “Este magistrado Bennet,” dice Fox, “fue
la primera persona que nos llamó cuáqueros,1 porque les pedí que temblaran ante la Palabra
del Señor.” De esta manera, el nombre de cuáqueros comenzó como una manera de ridiculizar
la amonestación de George Fox, pero pronto se hizo ampliamente conocida y usada a la largo
del mundo, y eventualmente fue aceptada por la Sociedad de Amigos.

En nuestra opinión, la obra del Señor en y a través de los primeros cuáqueros del siglo
XVII, fue en realidad un regreso a la vida, luz, poder y pureza original que los primeros
cristianos experimentaron y proclamaron ser el evangelio de Jesucristo. Estos hombres y
mujeres vieron al Señor, crecieron en Su vida y al igual que su Señor, fueron odiados,
calumniados y perseguidos por ello. No obstante, como sucede a menudo con los movimientos
genuinos del Espíritu de Dios, sus enseñanzas y prácticas fueron eventualmente
malentendidas, corrompidas y tergiversadas por las sucesivas generaciones de los que
llevaban su nombre. Las doctrinas y tradiciones pueden ser transmitidas de una generación
a la siguiente, pero la vida de Cristo debe nacer y ser experimentada en cada alma
individual. Es por esta razón que los pocos que se llaman a sí mismos cuáqueros hoy,
tienen poco o ningún parecido espiritual con sus antepasados. La vida y luz de Cristo que
una vez reinaron en los corazones hambrientos del siglo XVII han sido casi totalmente
abandonadas, y la Sociedad de Amigos de hoy es, escasamente, un cascarón de lo que alguna
vez fue tal vez, el más grande despertar espiritual desde Pentecostés.

## Explanations and Clarifications

Even from the earliest days of their society, many of the principles and practices of the
Quakers have been greatly misunderstood and misrepresented. And today there exists a whole
host of strange and untrue opinions and interpretations of their history and theology.
Before exploring the many journals and other writings of early Quakers provided on this
website, it may prove helpful to read through the information below.

### Light Within

The concept of spiritual light shining in the heart or conscience, is perhaps the most
well-known principle of the Quakers. Sadly, very few today (even among those who still
bear the name) understand or rightly represent what the first Friends taught about this
essential subject.

When early Quakers spoke of this light, they were not referring to anything that belongs
to man by nature. [Isaac Penington](/friend/isaac-penington) writes:

> "Man, by nature, is dead in trespasses and sins; quite dead, and his conscience is
> wholly dark. That which gives him the sense of his death and darkness must be another
> thing than his own nature, even the light of the Spirit of Christ shining in his dark
> heart and conscience." "Man is darkness, (Eph 5:8) and when Christ comes to redeem him,
> he finds him to be in darkness. Christ finds no light already in man to help him uncover
> sin. Thus all the discoveries of sin that are made in the heart are by the light of
> Christ, and not by any light of man's nature."

In other words, natural man has absolutely no true light inherent in himself. There is
nothing intrinsically good, true, or pure in man in his fallen condition. It is therefore
not the conscience itself that is, or that possesses, divine light (as many wrongly
assume). Paul writes, "to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but both
their mind and their conscience are defiled." Instead, it is Christ the Light sown as a
seed in the conscience that brings man to any knowledge of truth and, when obeyed, to the
salvation of the soul.

Furthermore, there have been many sad misunderstandings and false conclusions derived from
the Quakers use of the term "universal" in reference to this gift of light. The word
universal was used by them to establish an intentional contrast with the prevalent idea of
the time that God offers the saving knowledge of Christ to only a small, predestined few.
The Quakers rejected the idea of individual predestination, and insisted that God offers
life to all mankind through a measure of His light or grace that witnesses in the heart
against sin, and invites the soul to find salvation in Christ. It is this gracious, inward
invitation that is universal. When received, followed, and obeyed, this light becomes the
life and salvation of the soul. When rejected, the same light becomes man's eternal
condemnation. See John 3:19-21. Early Quakers were not at all proponents of universal
reconciliation.

### Customs and Language

There were several accepted customs in the mid 1600's to which early Friends could not
conform. The common dress of the day was very flamboyant, with an excess of useless lace,
ribbons, flashy buttons, powdered wigs, etc. The normal greetings between peers involved
scraping the right foot backwards along the ground, bowing low while removing the hat, and
then flattering one another with titles like "your Lordship," "your Eminency," etc. Early
friends felt that these and other like customs tended towards vanity, pride, and the
"fleshly honor which God would lay in the dust," and so would not practice these things.

Moreover, at this time in history, the correct and plain use of "thee" and "thou" to a
single person was beginning to give way to "you" and "your." Most modern English speakers
are unaware that the words "you" and "your" were originally plural pronouns used only to
address two or more people, whereas "thee" and "thou" were used to address one person. In
the 1600's, it became fashionable (again, as a means of showing honor or flattery) to use
the plural "you" or "your" in addressing people of higher social status, while "thee" and
"thou" were reserved for servants, children, or people of lower social or economic
position. Early Friends stuck to what was then considered "plain language" (using thee and
thou to every single person, and you and your to two or more), rather than showing
preferment by addressing certain individuals in the plural. These may seem like small
matters to the 21st century reader, but it is remarkable how many thousands of Friends
were insulted, beaten, imprisoned, and even hanged for refusing to conform to these
outward customs that serve no purpose besides flattering the fleshly man.

### Silent Meetings

Both from their own personal experience, and from many lamentable occurrences in church
history, early Quakers understood well the propensity of uncrucified flesh to seek to
lead, govern, and teach in things pertaining to the worship and service of God. The
natural man is extremely quick to run into doctrines, opinions, practices, and traditions,
employing his own carnal wisdom and ability in an attempt to build the church of God.
Friends saw clearly that this creates a false Christianity that stands in the will and
nature of fallen man, and which (like King Saul) seeks to offer the Lord the best of what
He has already rejected and condemned.

Quakers were therefore extremely careful and intentional about waiting on the Lord in the
silence of their flesh, and feeling after His life-giving Spirit, before they attempted to
pray, preach, worship, encourage, or admonish in their meeting together. In the words of
[Robert Barclay](/friend/robert-barclay):

> "When assembled, the great work of one and all ought to be to wait upon God, and, in
> turning away from their own thoughts and imaginations, to feel the Lord's presence and
> know the 'gathering into his Name' where He is 'in the midst' according to his promise.
> And as every one is gathered in this way, and met together inwardly in their spirits as
> well as outwardly in their bodies, there the secret power and virtue of life is known to
> refresh the soul, and the pure motions and breathings of God's Spirit are felt to arise.
> And from the Spirit, words of declaration, prayers, or praises arise, and the acceptable
> worship is known which both edifies the Church and is well-pleasing to God. In this way,
> no man limits the Spirit of God, nor brings forth his own contrived and gathered stuff,
> but everyone brings forth only what the Lord puts into their hearts, which is spoken not
> in man's will and wisdom but 'in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and of
> Power.'"

It is important to clarify that silence was never a goal of Quaker meetings. The silencing
of the forward, fleshy mind, and the humble turning of the heart to the Lord, was rather a
means to an end, and a way to guard against the wisdom and religion of man while they
waited for the pure and powerful influences of God's Spirit to feed and govern His own
spiritual body.

### Perfection

Early Quakers are sometimes known for their teaching that believers can become “perfect”
even on this side of the grave. The word perfect is one that can invite a lot of
misinterpretation and imagination, and so it is important to understand exactly what they
believed in this regard. First of all, this perfection has nothing to do with fixing or
changing the fallen fleshly nature. The nature of Adam is not repaired; it is
experientially crucified through the inward cross, the power of God, so that the soul
becomes progressively free from the law of sin and death, and governed by the law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. Therefore, the progress and perfection of the soul arises
from the birth and growth of the Seed of Christ within, and its victory (by degrees) over
the body of death. Early Friends believed (and many experienced) that the heart could be
united and subjected to the living Truth in such a way so as not to obey the suggestions
and temptations of the evil one, to cease from actual sinning, and in this sense be
perfect. However, they were always very careful to insist on the following two points: 1)
that this kind of perfection always allows for continued spiritual growth. As Christ
Himself is boundless and eternal, so our growth in Him knows no limits or restrictions.
And 2) that there always remains the possibility of sinning wherever the heart and mind
does not diligently and watchfully attend to the Lord.

### Persecution Against Early Quakers

Jesus said to His disciples, “You will be hated by all for My name's sake,” and “If the
world hates you, you know that it hated Me before you.” The world's hatred towards
disciples of Christ is rarely experienced today, in part because of the prevalence of a
cross-less, flesh-friendly gospel. It is uncommon (at least in the western world) for
believers in Jesus Christ to suffer for the enjoyment of a clear conscience before God.
This, however, was not the case when the Lord raised up the original Society of Friends.
The first Quakers were despised, persecuted, slandered, beaten, imprisoned, and killed,
both by magistracy and by the Christian sects of their time (Protestant and Catholic).
Early Friends lived at a time when very little liberty was granted to citizens to believe
and worship as they saw fit. The Church of England was run by the state, and multitudes of
laws were made and enforced mandating certain beliefs, specific meeting places and forms
of worship, and forbidding all others. Because of their refusal to conform to laws that
violated their consciences in the sight of God, Quakers suffered cruel beatings and
whippings, long imprisonments in cold, filthy prisons, cutting off of ears, banishment
from their native country, and even death. Between the years 1650–1690, prisons in England
were literally filled with Quakers who, for conscience sake, would not forgo meeting
together to worship God in the way they believed He required of them. Nor did they feel
free to attend other compulsory religious services, pay obligatory tithes to persecuting
priests, or swear oaths of allegiance in disregard to Christ's command in Matthew
5:34—"Swear not at all...but let your 'Yes' be 'Yes,' and your 'No,' be 'No.'"
